# Faint clouds of thunder -- about tanka and _The Garden Of Words_

«_The Garden Of Words_» is a 2013 animated (animé) movie by Makoto Shinkai --
the same director as «_Your Name_» and «_Weathering With You_».

The movie is wonderful, artsy, and short, and so I greatly encourage you to
watch it if you haven't already.

## Background

The movie follows two protagonists as they develop feelings for each other: one, a student with a passion for art
(and feet), and the other, a semi-depressed teacher with a tendancy to be
unconventional. Their unconventional love is fit to the background of skipping
school, a garden, and the rain. The two meet on rainy days in one of the parks
in Tokyo, where they talk to each other for comfort (hence, «_The Garden Of
Words_»).

The two eventually get to flirting, and one way they do this is with a poem
taken from the _Man'youshuu_. The Man'youshuu (literally «collection of 10,000
leaves») is the oldest collection of japanese poems, written sometime after the
year 759.

## About the man'youshuu0 and tanka

The man'youshuu is one of the most amazing texts in japanese. It features 4,496
poems written in the japanese spoken at the time, in the writing system of the
time (quite unalike to modern japanese). Because of its size, scope, and
content, it provides a huge amount of insight into the culture, language, and
lives of the people of Nara era Japan.

The poem which appears in the film is specifically a _tanka_ (literally «short
poem»), a genre of japanese poetry which uses 5-7-5-7-7 syllable structure.

Tanka have a deep history within japanese, but particluarly between lovers. In
ancient japan, lovers would often exchange poems, equivalent to how lovers in
early modern europe would often exchange letters of prose. And many tanka are
just straight up smut.

Because these poems got exchanged between lovers, tanka come with a culture of call and response. Tanka come in twos, the first written in response to the first, and using the same motifs. The tanka used in _The Garden Of Words_ is like this too -- the call is given early in the film, and the response given much later, reciprocated by the other protagonist love interest.

## The poem («_Faint Clouds Of Thunder_»)

The poem which appears in the film is beautiful. I've never seen the English
version of _The Garden Of Words_, but I love how the japanese version of this
poem sounds, how it feels, and the feelings it brings.

The poem doesn't have a name, and so I've named it using some of the lines of
the poem.

The poem goes like this (phonetic version below):

## Japanese

### 『万葉集2513』

  雷神の

  少し響みて

  さし曇り

  雨も降らぬか

  君を留めむ

### 『万葉集2514』

  雷神の

  少し響みて

  降らずとも

  我は留らぬ

  妹し留めば

## Latin

### Man'youshuu 2513 (call)

  Narukami no

  Sukoshi toyomite

  Sashikumori

  Ame mo furanu ka

  Kimi wo todomemu

### Man'youshuu 2513 (response)

  Narukami no

  Sukoshi toyomite

  Furazu tomo

  Ware wa tomaranu

  Imoshi todomeba

I could write a lot more about this poem (including how it sounds in middle
japanese, which is really cool). Having never seen the English version of _The
Garden Of Words_, I don't even know if they've used the same poem in the same
way. Given how much I liked this poem, I gave my own go at translating it, which
I give below.

## English

### «Man'youshuu 2513»

  Faint drums of thunder

  Company to clouded skies;

  I wonder if rain will come.

  Will you stay with me?

### «Man'youshuu 2514»

  Should the faint drums of thunder

  Not come down today,

  If you pull me by your side,

  I'll be here with you.

