Directions:

You will be given a brief quotation that states or implies an issue of general
interest and specific instructions on how to respond to that issue. You will
have 30 minutes to plan and compose a response in which you develop a position
on the issue according to the specific instructions. A response to any other
issue will receive a score of zero.

"Governments are justified in circumventing civil laws when doing so is vital to
the protection of national security"

Write an essay in which you take a position on the statement above. In
developing and supporting your position, you should consider ways in which the
statement might or might not hold true.

---

Disclaimer:

This work does not necessarily reflect the views of the author -- it's a debate
for which a side was picked at random, and had to be written about (for GRE
practice). It is public to provide a sample of the author's writing and thought
process, and makes no implication that any of these views are held by the
author or anybody else.

---

I believe that goverments are justified in circumventing civil laws when doing
so is vital to the protection of national security. In considering the case for
this, we most importantly must consider the mandate of government, where this
derives from, and what must be done in order for a government to maintain its
mandate to rule. Furthermore, there are short term and long term benefits and
costs to governments acting in this manner, which must be weighed up in the eyes
of the public. 

In order to argue in favor of this, we first explain why there are situations in
which national security cannot be defended within the framework of existing
laws, and extend upon this to prove beyond doubt that governments are justified
in circumventing civil laws in these situations, and finally rebutting
counterarguments to this case. 

Government obtains its mandate from the people. Even in countries without
democracy, the principle that government should act in the interests of the
public is present. If they do not act in the public interest, they risk being
removed from power, either peacefully or by force. Embedded in this principle of
a public mandate comes, above all else, an assurance of public security. The
government must protect the peoples' property, rights, and lives. Because of
this principle on which all governments exist, it becomes essential for a
government to defend the people it represents. 

There are various situations in which there are no existing frameworks for
government to act appropriately. I will be looking at 2 main examples:
terrorism, and war. In both of these cases, it is clear why national security
may be compromised, making these both existential problems for any government.
Furthermore, because of the great risk to human life, in war as in terrorist
attacks, the government must act quickly in order to succeed in life-or-death
situations. In many cases, governments will not have enough evidence, by any
legal grounds, to make an arrest, especially where the culprit has planned and
orchestrated an attack, but has no prior evidence to suggest involvement. This
also happens in war, where in certain situations circumventing the rights of the
public and civil laws, such as in critical battles in a war, can be essential to
success in that war. Such situations were faced by both Britain and the Soviet
Union in the Second World War. If actions are not taken outside of the law by
the government in these situations, a quick enough response may not be achieved,
and lives, or perhaps the existence of the nation, may not be guaranteed. 

The government above all exists for defense. This is clear from the perspective
that if the government does not defend its people and country, neither would
continue to exist. The vast majority of people also value their life above their
rights, as without their life, they would not be able to enjoy the freedoms laws
enshrine at all. 

Now we have established situations in which the government must circumvent laws
in order to be effective, and that acting in contradiction to civil laws is
justified in the national interest. In acting outside of the law in situations
of war or terrorism, even if only restricted to a small number of cases of
either, it is able to defend the public, the country, and ensure that it is able
to continue to uphold the laws that, in other situations, are upheld for the
benefit of its people. 

There are some points of contention in this argument. For one, many may argue
that the mandate of government to rule is founded in law and democracy, and to
act outside of this would be losing its mandate to rule over a people.
Furthermore, circumventing civil law in any situation may set a dangerous
precedent, and undermine the delicate checks and balances system of government,
giving the government too much power and thereby endangering the rights of the
public in the long-term. However, both of these arguments are based on the
assumption that the rights of the public can be held in the long-term. In the
case of many acts of terror and war, because the very existence of the state is
at risk, the rights of the public in the long-term would be worse without the
government temporarily suspending them in order to protect the public. This is
also clear from the Second World War, where, following the fall of France's
government, France could no longer ensure the rights and safety of the Jewish
people living there. In this case it is clear that were there to be an
alternative route for France to uphold the public freedom against a far more
dangerous enemy, the government would not become an enemy of the people, but
istead, in the long-term, a protector of their freedoms. 

As well as this, most countries do have legal frameworks in place to allow the
government to extend its powers in acts of war or terror to do what is necessary
to protect its people, in which case circumventing laws may be seen as
unnecessary. As we established earlier, however, there are situations where
government cannot act quickly enough within the legal frameworks of civil laws.
Especially in terrorist attacks, which may occur without warning, the government
will not be fast enough to convene and grant itself emergency powers to protect
the lives of the public. 

As a result, it is clear that there are situations where national security
cannot be guaranteed without circumventing civil laws. Furthermore, in these
cases, government must circumvent laws if they are to guarantee freedoms of its
people in the long-term, which is ultimately more important, and also that they
are justified in doing so, given that all governments receive their mandate in
great part from public defense. Lest the echos of history be heard again,
governments must, and should, circumvent civil laws in such cases to protect
national security.

Andrew Jun Young
